1. Write a program that reads a string from the user containing a date in the form mm/dd/yyyy. 
It should print the date in the form March 12, 2021.

2. Write a program that accepts a string from the user. Your program should count and display 
the number of vowels in that string.

3. Write a Python program that accepts a string from the user. Your program should create and 
display a new string where the first and last characters have been exchanged. For example, 
if the user enters the string 'HELLO' then the new string would be 'OELLH'.

4. Write a Python program that accepts a string from the user. Your program should create a new 
string by shifting one position to the left. For example, if the user enters the string 
'examination 2021' then the new string would be 'xamination 2021e'.

5. Write a program that asks the user to input their name and print its initials. Assuming that 
the user always types first name, middle name, and last name and does not include any unnecessary 
spaces. For example, if the user enters Ajay Kumar Garg the program should display A. K. G. Note: 
Don't use the split() method.

Lists
6. Write a program that accepts a list from the user and prints the alternate element of the list.

7. Write a program that accepts a list from the user. Your program should reverse the content of the 
list and display it. Do not use the reverse() method.

8. Write a program that rotates the element of a list so that the element at the first index moves 
to the second index, the element in the second index moves to the third index, etc., and the element 
in the last index moves to the first index.

Data File Handling
9. Write a function in Python to create a text file myfile.txt and save the content in it and define 
a function to read the content from a text file myfile.txt and display the same on the screen.

10. Write a function in Python to count the number of lines from a text file story.txt which does not 
start with the alphabet "T". Example: If the file story.txt contains the following lines: A boy is 
playing there. There is a playground. An aeroplane is in the sky. The sky is pink. Alphabets and 
numbers are allowed in the password. The function should display the output as 3.

11. Count and display the total number of words in a text file.
12. Find and display the occurrence of the word "the" in a text file.
13. Display words which are less than 4 characters from a text file.
14. Count words ending with the alphabet "e" in a text file.
15. Display details of students with percentage above 75% in "STUDENT.DAT".
16. Add one more record to the binary file "employee.dat"